This is Leanne talking about his dictionary collection.
OK.
So this is, right now in Algeria, there's a battle going on with the Berbers, basically.
It's sort of insurrection.
And the Berbers are trying to assert their rights of the people.
And linguistically, they differ from the Arabs, of course.
This is why I can't get any gum Arabic right now.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, this other voice is Tim Ely, a noted bookmaker and artist.
The language those Verbers speak is Tomashek, it's called, and it's a language for which there was no written form, and for which actually only one major dictionary exists.
And I got that dictionary.
It came out in two volumes.
The man who did it in 1880 and then again the second volume in 1900 had to invent the actual script for the language, and he did it all and did it by hand, and hand lithographed the book.
That's why the book's very rare.
And as far as I've been able to tell, there is no other set of the two volumes anywhere except the set I have.
Is it an extent language?
It's still being spoken.
So it's this language, Tomashek, which is a Berber language.
And I have many Berber languages in the collection.
But it just, it was interesting to me that it's in the news now.
And I have really, I think, the only two-volume set of the early first dictionary of language.
There's never been an English language dictionary yet of this language, Tamashe.
And where again is this place?
It's in northern Africa, Algeria, is where the Berber languages are spoken, in that area.
And similarly, when the Afghani situation was in the news, I had the first dictionary of the Pushtu language.
And it's a dictionary that's so rare that I see I've not been able to find
any other institution that has a copy of it.
So is this a literate society?
This is an oral society that has a language that's never been written down.
So why would they need a dictionary if they couldn't read it?
The dictionaries were created by missionaries in order to spread the gospel, or they were created by explorers for purely scientific and linguistic reasons, or they were created by military figures
who wanted military domination, but they wanted to be able to understand the population.
So those are some of the major... People other than those who... Yeah, they're all bilingual dictionaries.
They're all bilingual, and they're bilingual with many languages.
If it's in the area of Indonesia, they're Dutch bilingual dictionaries.
If it's the indigenous languages of what used to be the Soviet Union, they'll be Russian.
or they'll be, in other cases, Dutch.
I've seen maps.
When I first started this work, I was looking at maps of the Northwest Territories.
I was actually doing some book repair.
An atlas was brought to me, which was a small little volume, and it opened up into this really wonderful book structure that I've used.
But instead of places, because these villages were essentially nomadic, they were just grouped as languages.
And so this would be Tlingit or Haida or something, and it was a great crossover.
And all I could see as I looked at this was that this is a mobile map.
This is a structure that is going to not have townships or boundaries in any conventional Western map-making or cartographic system.
This thing is like a sea of amoebas.
And I have that book, too, the one with the fold-out maps with the languages on it of that area.
But what I was thinking then was that, say, if you looked at this Tomashek,
as an example, or looked at some of the early scripts that were devised in order to try to represent the language for the first time, that you would perhaps, you know, find that an inspiration for a book?
Well, there's great inspiration in that.
Looking at Albertine Gowery's book on Western written forms, just flipping through it, I don't find that I want to emulate them, but then I find that as I work, they get emulated.
And it's a fascinating idea, because I feel it.
these graphic marks for sounds are made up of a really small group of possibilities that you're either going to make a black mark that goes up or down, it's going to cross, it's going to curve.
There's not a lot you can do until you start really abstracting these forms.
So most written languages tend to be graphically graspable.
And I have met people that can read
early Chinese, because they're just visually literate, and they can't grasp the nuance, but they can go through and say, well, this is man, man, house, dog, carrots, possibly dinner, maybe fire, and they're pretty bang on.
And you know that combination of maps and languages, too, that you were talking about could be a very interesting way to go about
something.
We've been fascinated with the notion here and thinking about doing an exhibition called something like No Maps in the Imagination.
That's a boring title, but you know what I mean, in which we would focus on maps of imaginary countries.
Of course, almost every literary work that deals with an imaginary place, Lord of the Rings.
There is a book that's published that emphasizes the art
side of that, mostly.
And I was interested in the way in which the literary texts, the created maps for literary texts.
But anyway, it's just a coarser, as you know, a richly evocative sort of thing to look at and deal with maps.
I have a question for you, Mr. Ely.
When you're creating a book, it's a unique book, and it's preferable, I guess, but as you're talking about these various codes that you embed in the book,
Do you visualize a reader?
Is this book being created for a reader of one?
I mean, because it's one book that you're making.
And also, for the one reader, you're also making it very difficult to penetrate.
Oh, I'm making it impenetrable.
Well, I've always loved... So who are you creating the book for?
Edgar Allan Poe's Goldbug story has a code that, for a very long time, people thought was real code.
just because it looked so good.
And it was finally deciphered and found that it wasn't a code.
It was just verisimilitude.
And I've always loved that idea of taking something out of Principia and writing the equation out, and then just screwing it up, copying it badly, so that someone that is a specialist would look at this thing and go, well, it's OK, except it's spelled wrong.
We used to lift phrases out of words.
Phrases out of phrase books.
And I stopped doing it because I found the phrase books were usually wrong.
So somebody who was fluent in French would go, well, your grammar here is terrible.
OK, so I won't do that.
I tend to think of these things as I don't really know unless it's a commission and I'm making it for someone.
I don't know where this book's going to go.
And I love the idea that I could slip this volume
uncataloged into, like, the San Francisco Public Library, and somebody would try to shut it.
Don't put it in that library, though.
You know, it was discarded.
Or take it to Powell's in Portland and just shelve it, and maybe write, you know, eight dollars on the flyleaf.
And what, if there is to be any furor that will erupt when somebody takes this thing up to check out, you know, eight dollars on this
What is this?
And just step back and watch.
But I'm very amused by these.
I love to make these.
I think I got the best job in the world, but then I think maybe Jim's job is better.
And so I had a really potent dream as a child that I found a book about this size that explained how all these marvelous technical inventions were made.
And I tried to make that book when I was too young.
my attention span was too short, and it just didn't happen.
But the dream was so vivid that when I later started to make books, I realized that maybe there's something very pivotal in that mental propellant that would make me want to make books over paintings.
I make paintings occasionally, and my last exhibition was paintings, but it had none of the buzz that making a book had near me.
I don't fight it anymore.
I just realized
I want to see this thing be this very intimate experience that someone can be given this book, and I can leave it alone for as long as it takes, and they report back to me that they've been changed.
But it is one, so one.
It is one, yeah.
I've made a few additions.
Printing is not something that appeals to you.
I feel like I'm more pre-Gutenberg.
Only because I think that
I love making etchings.
I've recently made another printed book, but the edition size is so small, I might as well be unique.
There's six, and the only one has been bounced.
The rest are in the drawer.
Is it one with the text, then, as such?
No, it's all etching fragments.
It's yours, yeah.
But I get closer to a texture.
You may not have come in yet when we were discussing the idea
the fact that the Lilly collects early cryptography books, and obviously there's a relationship here.
And I like the sense of Tim's work some way as a sort of code, a cryptographic book that you think you can figure out, and you can't really.
At one point, there were codes that you could decipher, and they were very simple
But I would always tend to forget the key.
So I'd go back and say, I can't tell this, and I'm not really patient enough to try and make this happen.
But it seemed like a very interesting idea to take important passages that were important to me and to just insightful them in some way.
And then I figured, well, I've got to figure out a way to put the key in the book so that I can remember it.
Because I'll often be just, I work so
I'll work on some projects, and by the time the thing is done, I kind of go, well, that's done.
Let's move on to the next one.
And someone will say, what's this book about?
Hang on.
Let me go back to maybe Sketchbook 49 has some reference as to why this thing came into being.
We were also talking about cookbooks as ideas, you know, of inspiration, perhaps, even.
And Tim said, well, maybe you might do a cryptographic cookbook.
I could encipher all of my
egg-tempered recipes.
Exactly.
And then if you didn't read the code right, you might be poisoned at the end rather than fed.
You could die from this book.
And you'd have that caveat in code, too.
The other obvious area, and I know, is magic books, books of the occult, and so forth, because many people would immediately think, well, there may be something
These do not seem demonic in any way.
No, they're pretty much on the white side.
Yeah, they are very much on the white side.
I'm definitely inspired by you.
This stuff would have me burned at the stake.
Yeah, exactly.
This is what I was trying to say.
You wouldn't be alive.
That's a great one.
Free Gutenberg.
It's just the stuff I make.
It's the stuff I own.
And they just go, oh, man, you're out of here.
So for those who can decipher this, are there rewards?
Or is it the exercise that's the thing?
I'd say both.
I think that for me, the joy is in the exercise and in the ongoing challenge of making books that my mentors, my heroes, like Bernard Middleton and Philip Smith, you know, if Bernard looks at this and goes, this isn't too bad, then I know I'm fine.
And now that I've got Philip's stamp of approval, I think, okay, that's good.
I'm almost there.
But I'm really fussy, so
I wrestle with a lot of the technical issues and just my own personal buzz.
But I think that the people that I know that have these, if they can stand inside the mystery and not need to be either told what it means or if they don't quest for an answer, they expand.
And the ones that the people that I find have the most difficulty with them
want that answer.
They want to know what it's about.
When Chronicle Books published The Flight Into Egypt, the marketing people wanted, you know, one paragraph, just tell us what this thing is about.
I go, oh, that's your job.
I can tell you what I think it's about, but you have to know that that's conditional on
a lot of things it's not an is it's a seems to be a thing that i find as a reader looking at the book thinking about reading a book like this is that most books that you pick up when you begin them you know what it means to read them it means you go through to the end and you're finished and you put the book down when you pick up a book like this you just want to keep going back to it again and again and there is no sense really that you started them you know and turn the pages to the end
and you've read the book, it's a different sort of reading.
It doesn't end, really, in a normal way.
It's a sphere.
I think it's fantastic.
This is the only one I think of.
There are books that circle on themselves, but Joyce's Finnegan's Way, that ends with the middle half of a sentence that's the first sentence of the book.
At last, along the, and then it starts at the beginning river, run past Eve and Adam's.
and so forth.
There have been other books, too, that sort of bite their own tail.
Which is, you know, the invitation into transformation.
That book is transformative that way.
I think just that idea of, I had a friend in college that always started to sketch books at both ends and toward the middle.
It just made me crazy.
And so I still find that I play these things out like it's a piece of music and that there's a really loud portion somewhere, but at the end.
Finnegan's Wake is a book that I think we can honestly say that no one has ever read.
I've been professionally... I read it in the sense that I passed my eyes over it from the first page to the last page.
But there only were truly probably half a dozen people to a dozen in the world who have actually had some sort of grasp of Finnegan's Wake in a fuller way.
There are pages in which people don't know really what's going on very well at all, in spite of having a guide, a sort of skeleton's key.
All of that makes me think that Finnegan's Wave might be an inspiration to you, too, to do a book, because it's filled with dreams, it's filled with images.
The problem is that you nor anybody else can actually read Finnegan's Wave.
It's more a dipping into, say, dip in here, dip in there,
And something comes out of it.
Terence McKenna used to use it as a kind of ocular device, where he would be lecturing.
And he'd say, let's just see what the book says.
And he would crack Finnegan's way to read a sentence or two.
And he'd go, yes, that is appropriate to what we're talking about.
And he'd watch, and that's something that I heard about psychedelic mushrooms.
Yeah, exactly.
And it always seemed to work at least as a hinge point, whether or not it was real.
I think maybe the second academic publication I had was a publication in a thing that was called the Waite Newsletter.
It was little bits about Finnegan's Waite published in Australia, I think, at the time.
But at any rate, I wrote on one paragraph of Finnegan's Waite 12 pages, and of course I didn't begin to say everything that was in that paragraph of interest, but that's typical.
You're sticking your head into a particle accelerator, and there's just so much in there.
It's like trying to report back on a dream you had after a few sentences.
It fails to English.
When you mention magic, I don't know that I'm a believer in it as a belief system, but there are things that have popped up, things like the magic square as a
divination device.
So I've been using magic squares, or Vedic systems, and number systems, so that, well, when we talked about you giving me an inspiration, maybe I get a set of numbers, GPS coordinates, the year the library was built.
It could be a pile of things.
And I code those numbers out to give myself a shape.
That shape is lifted.
and can be expanded or reduced and that becomes a pattern that looks very linear and looks just like a pattern, a tiling, a nothingness.
But it has built into it those coordinates that are specific.
I think this is the square of Jupiter.
And I've been working on a bunch of books called The Tables of Mercury.
I think the Mercury square is 8 by 8, which gives me more numbers, more permutations.
And so just by creating these little simple devices, look at the device in terms of what's its original meaning, what is this thing about it, what's something to give one a suspicious marriage or wealth.
But it also can be this other thing, and just by simply rotating it, playing with it, I suddenly get this new entry into decorative book binding that nobody would cooperate and relate with.
What I like about Tim's work so much is the way it allows people who love books to look at books in a new way, and to see books in a new way as well.
Very interestingly, you said you sort of twitch when they're thinking about, oh, where should this be?
Books should be where people want them and where people love to have them.
I mean, that's what's really important.
But it is true that the sort of books you create, on the one hand, a normal library to say, that's not
got any text in it.
It's not a book.
And a normal art museum would say, we can't put that on the wall.
That's a sort of book.
We don't know what to do.
And so they fall between.
And one thing I'm really interested in doing at the Lilly is building into this area and picking up in this area that might otherwise be lost between institutions some way and building it in.
I think it was UCLA.
And they said, well, we don't collect
We only collect editions.
It's all fine.
And there certainly could be unique works of art that you would say were of no particular interest to a library as such, because they would be simply works of art that were bound together into the notebook or something.
Your work is so directly related to books.
It is books.
They are books, and they're so directly related to the world of ideas.
and the world of texts, if that's something special.
I didn't realize how large an examination that would be when I started making these things.
It was awfully casual, and I thought, well, this is just a way for me to get my drawings, or eventually my prints, into a form that is like a portfolio presentation.
And then one thing led to another.
I met a conservator, and the conservator suggested boxes,
That suggested the package deal, and little metaphors crept in, and more information crept in, and I suddenly realized, my god, libraries, that's where he is at.
If I simply look at these things, the raw material is going to occupy me for the rest of my days, without even a number of scratches.
And the interesting thing, too, that you're doing is, and that might be interesting for you, Nick, is that you're creating
a readership of a different sort.
We all know what readers of novels are, and we all know what people who look at pictures are.
But the readership, what you're creating here is a new sort of readership of people who are interested in books, interested in text, interested in the way, in the codex, the way things are structured, and the way they're put together as books, and interested in codes, and in visual codes, and in also
scripts, and you put all that together.
It's a very small readership because, since the books are unique, a person has to actually hold that book in their hands.
And how many people are going to get to do it here in, say, in the Lilly Library?
It happens because our collections are open to the readers to actually use, not to take away, but within our reading room under our controlled conditions.
People actually take things and look at them, and Jim uses them, and we use them in class.
And so there'll be more readers here than there would be in a private collection.
And the work that grabs, that's nice.
Someone comes in and has that experience and tells someone about it, and you see them, another student, come venture in.
And of course, you can also inspire other artists until there's, you know, until there's an explosion of books that look very much like Tim Ely's books, but maybe not quite as good.
There was a fellow in Eugene that went to the Multnomah College Library in Portland,
a recent acquisition, and I can just see that he's trapped in this fever dream of emulation, and he's desperately trying to work out of it, but the circles and diagrams keep intruding into his work, and it's just a matter of time until he gets out of his system, but it's a virus.
We were talking about that last night.
Moving beyond your teacher.
And here's the other thing.
In your work, there's a beauty and a precision that
is extremely inspirational, I would think, but extremely hard to emulate.
And I would think anyone who was really inspired wouldn't dare try to go in your direction, because what could they do to make it finer, in a way?
They would better go into something a little different so they don't look like an imitator, and not even a particularly good imitator, perhaps.
So have you allowed any of these books to be digitized?
Are there digital copies?
I have a handful of digital photographs, but I haven't quite gotten to that end yet, I guess.
Because it was kind of changed the dynamic entirely.
What we would probably do here, we already have a miniature, and we're having from the Hubert's a copy of the book.
Do we have any?
Any of your books, a large book?
No.
A larger book?
Okay, so that's what we want to get.
But at any rate, what we might well do is make digital images.
We'll talk with you about that, but make digital images and put them on our website so that someone could come and click, click, click, click, and go through a book that we hold.
So it really wouldn't be... Then it would be available to a wider audience.
I think that would be a great idea because I know you... I don't think you have a desire...
that not many people see your work.
I mean, you'd probably like to have... Is it tactile?
Is it tactility?
Of course.
It is to me.
Books feel good.
And I had a really hard time reading Henry James in college, and somebody said, go over to the library and get a real edition of this, and you can actually touch, type with paper.
Get it out of this little tiny thing that you're struggling with,
And it changed my life.
The idea of these images would be that it would get people excited about coming in to look at the book.
It wouldn't be a substitute.
I've made postcards of some of these pages, and my own art education.
I went to college up near the Canadian border, and so, you know, there was an art museum.
So I didn't see a real Jackson Pollock painting.
I thought they were all this big for years.
And I finally saw them.
I was like, oh, my God.
The bigger than you thought.
I had to revise everything.
And the Salvador Dali painting, The Persistence of Memory, is only this big.
But I always thought it was this big.
So I kept thinking it was going to be.
So I still have a great deal of difficult scale.
We have another exhibition I've been thinking of doing, and I think it'll be a fascinating one.
is an exhibition in which the original work, in the way in which the author or artist intended it to be seen, is exhibited side by side with a Norton anthology reprint, or a reclame reprint, or one of the smaller ones.
And that would then, for instance, take something like Le Stefan Georg's poetry in the little reclame edition, and put it beside the huge, beautiful hand-done
I have a whole chapter on this concept in my new book.
This whole element of paratex, the elements that make them, the way the author intended it to be experienced.
Trisprim Shandy, for instance, where you have to see
the first edition of that book.
Exactly.
This is the thing.
And there's... Oh, Blake's books.
I mean, every one is different.
Exactly.
And you have to experience the art with poetry to get what he intended for you to experience.
I don't know if you know the author, Bill, William Bowman.
I know.
I'm sure.
Okay, so we know Bill, so I know him.
He...
As you may know, his work's published mostly by, they were published by Grove Press and Pantheon and others.
And in order for his, he said, in order for him to present the books the way he wanted to present them, he founded a press called the Cotangent Press, and he produced a limited number of each of his shorter books, these are, fewer than ten copies of each one in the format that he intended
And I have now, as personally, I've got those.
I have a complete collection of all of these limited editions.
Now, the cotangent, say the first edition, take the one of Butterfly Stories.
It's about prostitutes in Thailand.
In Grove Press, it comes out in a normal, small octavo format with black and white drawing illustrations.
What I have is the original full-size thing, and he did
He was going to do ten copies of them, and when I got it, he produced it for me, actually, and bound it, because he'd done so few, and there was no colophon on the book.
And I said, don't, we need a colophon to notice, but you said there were going to be ten copies of it.
He said, well, okay, so he sent me a hand-done colophon to put in the book, and it said, you know, this book was done so-and-so.
There have been, three copies have been produced,
The first two were given to prostitutes in Thailand, and given the nature of their lives and the weather, these have probably disappeared.
This is copy number three, and that's all.
He hasn't done any more copies, probably won't do any more copies.
I could lay that side by side with the gold press edition, for example.
Well, my play in Egypt is this big, massive thing, and the facsimile is this little square piece of tile printed on the wrong paper.
They didn't look at the end paper, so they printed it backwards.
Oh, my gosh.
Just all kinds of really great things.
Chronicle books, you said?
Chronicle books.
When did they do it?
1995.
So this was a book you shared.
This is what I shared.
They were in New York for some reason.
They went to Granary Books and saw this book, amongst other things, and said, well, we need to do this book.
And it was one of those publishing nightmares that, being totally inexperienced, there were no publishers.
I was taken to the cleaners.
And they didn't know what to do with this thing.
So it was hardly distributed.
It sold very poorly.
And I kept telling them, well, it's not about something you can't.
Barnes & Noble had it categorized, if you looked it up on that catalog, as big.
Don't tell Bradley, they put me in.
Search for big.
You're in how-to?
Barnes & Noble, they're going in on my general basis.
How to collect, which is ridiculous.
You can't learn anything.
But I've got a nice little pile of these things left, and it's a very interesting thing.
It's almost like it's a translation, and it's probably a bad translation.
I keep thinking, well, authors write text and publishers
take those things and run through a blender of some kind and out the other end, if you're lucky, it's gorgeous.
And under normal conditions, it's a little paperback.
Another example that I would put in the exhibit is that Franz Kafka's early text, he specified the typeface they were to be in, and he wanted the largest possible typeface
that could be used in the book, because he considered his prose to be like poetry.
He wanted to slow down the reading process.
Well, the typeface is not a particularly beautiful result as a piece of bookmaking, and the typeface is very big.
It's never been reprinted in that size, though.
And I think that people who love Kafka and are interested in Kafka's writing should at least realize that when they read this story, that Kafka wanted it to look like the first edition.
They should see the first edition and see what he felt.
In fact, later, after the first one had come out, he wrote to the publishers again.
That was Kurt Wolfen.
And he said, you know,
please, I'd like that big typeface again, if we can do it.
A great example is Vanity Fair.
I mean, Thackeray did illustrations, and he did all of the illuminations, and only the first printing has his, in fact, the subtitle when it was serialized was Pen and Pencil Sketches of London, or whatever.
And every edition of Vanity Fair is totally devoid.
None of them have his illustrations, which would seem to me really part of what he wanted you to
to experience it than with the book.
That would be another reason.
Exactly.
Well, Philip Smith's book by itself is great, but I read it probably once a year, and there aren't big holes in it.
And I found out that he asked the publisher to print the book so that the paper grain was correct, so that he could do some bindings on it, or other people might consider doing some bindings.
But there are also 80 pages of the manuscript that just were a little run out of page space.
And yet there are huge areas where there's just nothing except a little spot illustration of something irrelevant to the chapter.
And it's almost as if they took the manuscript and threw it in the air, shook it down, said, get this to be positive.
And so I decided I'm going to ask them if I could see the original manuscript, because there are processes that it just suddenly stops and go, I know this book isn't done.
What happens after Step 70?
You know the thing about size.
Again, Bowman wrote a book on the history of violence.
It's just come out, Violence Against Women, primarily.
And no publisher would touch it because it was so long.
And then David Eggers, after he had such great success with a novel of heartbreaking or staggering genius, I forget the exact title.
He subsidized this, and it's come out now in seven volumes, box set.
But then it will be reduced to one volume for public consumption in a more commercial... It got a huge review in the New York Times.
It did, it did, because Volman is such a crazy man.
Oh, he is so crazy.
But he is, and I have to die before long, but... He's charmed, he's charmed, I swear.
He makes it through a lot, doesn't he?
But he just...
He just writes obsessively.
He just can't stop writing.
And a lot of what he writes just seems like genius.
And then a lot of it just goes over the top, and people can't stand it.
And so these long articles will come out because people say, and one early reviewer said this in the New Republic.
He said, I just felt like I have to come to terms with his work and try to figure it out.
And most of the people who look at the whole sum of what he does are very positive about
about what he can represent for American literature.
There's stuff going on there, but I think he's just, you know, it's going to take a long time to sort it out.
He's easily ten years younger than I am.
He's so unbelievably prodigious.
I've met him just yesterday.
The Bright and Risen Angels had just come out in England.
That was early.
I never got all the way through it, but there was one paragraph that was just so mind-numbingly awesome.
that I knew I had to get something going with this guy.
I was sort of this advisor, he'd call me up and say, I'm going to Cambodia next week, and I'll bring you back some stuff, but I need to know what I can take for art materials, because it's really unit.
So we'd get him out and set up so we could take paper and bring his materials.
Then he'd call me back and say, you know, I was there, and I didn't bring any dirt back from this trip, because I kept sorting through it, and I kept finding human bones and shell casings.
Yeah, that would have been a little... I don't know that I would... I probably would have had to have filtered that.
As you know, he works into his vines.
He's the one I have of Butterfly Stories.
He includes in them things like bits of the bras of prostitutes and used condoms.
Not the type of thing you normally want to handle.
He called me up the first time and said, I have a book.
I've met somebody that knows you.
I want to meet you.
So he comes up and brings this book.
His correspondences were women in prison.
What was it called?
Convict Bird.
And he shows up with this little, delicate inkjet or laser print on Japanese paper, but it was in this steel box.
Yeah, we've got that.
And he carried this thing up to the fourth floor of my apartment, and he put down padding.
He said, this is going to scratch your tables.
I'm going to lift this cauldron out, set it down, and unlatch this thing in.
It was a hot July day, and he was just sweating with this little thing.
I was like, oh my god, there's this braid from this woman's hair.
Yes, that's it.
A lot from the hair of a prostitute in prison.
I started reading this thing, and it was just astonishing.
And this is what he wanted to do.
And did I have any suggestions of where he could go with these?
And I sent him off to some dealers.
And they were just far too used to the relationship with my father.
And Bill shows up, and I go, oh, my God, this is really interesting, but not for me.
There is a dealer now who handles his works, and that's how I got in touch with him and actually bought everything that he had done, basically.
That's Priscilla Givalis, who's doing that now.
But I'll tell you an interesting story there.
At the time, I decided I wanted to get everything that Bill had done, and I didn't know him personally.
I just thought it was so interesting, the whole concept of creating what you want, as opposed to the commercial edition.
And that first one was published in ten copies, and I couldn't find one.
There wasn't one available.
So I said to him, do you have a copy of number one?
You know, first one, one, and ten.
And he said, no, but I'll make you a copy.
I'll make a special copy for you, a unique copy.
So I said, all right.
So what he did was he did a unique copy of one for me.
She called it second edition and one copy.
But it was he did a different binding.
He did the binding all himself with an etching into the cover of steel and cover.
And inside, he did the whole book by hand and hand-colored it.
And the original is only in black and white.
So I've got this beautiful thing.
And then eventually, of course, I also found the first edition with the lock of hair and everything so that I have both now.
But he's also willing to do that.
He will make a unique book for someone.
Talk about energy.
He's a player.
I'm going to say 43 to 45.
Yeah, 43 to 45.
I met him when I was, I think he was in his 20s when I met him.
He was still going off on these killer expeditions.
He'd call me and say, I just got back from the Arctic.
I just about died, but they sold me to Washington.
Do you know, he spent part of his youth here in Bloomington.
His father was on the faculty of the School of Business, and he wrote to me, and he said, I remember well going into the lily and reading H.B.
Lovecraft.
He remembered the lily, he remembered reading here.
He won't come back here, not for publication, but he won't come back here because he was with a photographer friend of his in Bosnia or Yugoslavia, and they were shot at, and his friend was killed right next to him in the car.
And that friend came from Bloomington, and the mother is still here.
I said, why don't you come back to Bloomington, as long as he didn't bring his gun with him, which he carries around.
And he said, I can't.
He said, I can't return to Bloomington.
He said, I'm afraid that my friend's mother, it would be too hard for her.
She knew I was there.
He said, she really, really dislikes me because of what happened.
And he said, I just can't come back to Bloomington, which I thought was interesting.
But his stuff is here.
Well, we've all these books.
Again, right now, they're in my collection, but they're for the lily traditions.
I think, let's see, Fathers and Crows, maybe three or four books that Deutsch published.
I did the jacket and designed them for.
Oh, we've got those.
Then I should have you sign the jacket for me.
Yeah, I've got them all down.
They're not right here in the lily.
I've got them somewhere else.
We'll go to the bank.
Because I just got a locker to put these things in.
They're so big, and you can't really keep them on the shelf with them.
But the Deutsch editions, of course, are normal-sized books, and I've got all of those, too.
Oh, that'd be wonderful, yeah.
And then we have the only signed copies, both of them.
They're all signed by Bowman, because he signs everything.
It's rare to find a copy that he hasn't signed.
He does a lot of signing.
In addition to everything else, he's so energetic.
He signs books like that.
He's in Sacramento now.
Sacramento.
Yeah, he was writing so furiously in New York, and his wife-to-be... Has anybody written anything like that?
What's that?
Has anybody written anything of length in America?
There have been some, a couple of articles about him, because he lives his close-to-death life.
He almost died up in, he went up to the Arctic to write one of his novels, and almost died.
When I saw him, I had breakfast, Linda and I had breakfast with him in San Francisco.
He came in and had friends, he has a number of friends,
introduced me to his wife, and then to a woman he said was his other wife, I don't know exactly what that means, married to a close friend of his who was also there and other people.
And he said he had just come back from, he does things for Spin Magazine and others, had just come back from like a canoeing trip on this river that is so polluted that it's got hydrochloric acid in it, and that if you fall out of your boat,
immediately die.
He said, I made it through safely.
He said, I made it through safely, so I'm all right.
But that's the sort of risks he takes over.
He was interviewing the neo-Nazi survival and stuff in northern Idaho.
I was living in Oregon.
So he'd swing by and either crash on the couch or stay with somebody.
And he was always bringing these very unusual people with him that were kind of traveling companions or something.
They were really edgy.
But I kept thinking, God, you're going up to Hayden Lake.
And somehow he was interviewing the dictator, the guy who was running Madagascar.
That one really scared him, that one.
He thought that any time the guy was just going to turn on him and have him shot.
So I would just send him a postcard every six or eight months and just find out if he's OK.
One of his early books that was fun to read was How I Won the War in Afghanistan.
And I always thought that after the Afghanistan war started and so forth, that they might bring that out again.
He was a journalist, essentially, also, who would go places and write about things.
He was also a programmer.
Yeah.
He lived on candy bars and would write at night.
He didn't have a place to live, so he would sleep under his desk for a few hours.
And he wrote You Bright and Risen Angels while working in Silicon Valley.
Yeah.
And he has terrible carpal tunnel, because he doesn't write 16, 18 hours a day until Janus will pull him off.
He's writing by hand or something else.
I know he really suffers.
It's hard for him just to write for that.
And he's written, I think, now four volumes of his projected seven-volume novels, seven novels on the history of America.
So you did the jacket for one or two of those volumes?
I did one for the Rifles, one for Fathers and Crows.
Did he get the third one out?
I think Deutsch is for it.
Yeah, I'm not sure about that.
I'm not sure about that either.
How did it happen that you did Deutsch?
How do his books do commercially?
I think he has a loyal following.
And I don't often see, I see the American edition's remainder, but he is so...
prolific.
And I think he has a real following amongst all of that sort of 25 to 35 age group that's really interested in .
He is a sort of cult figure.
There's a website that's kept up about him and people who know exactly what he's writing and where and what he's working on.
He has a lot of support that way.
But I was wondering how it came that you did the covers for Deutsch.
Well, Dutch was kind of his pals, and somehow it came up that I should make a drawing, and he was going over, and my ex-wife was English, so when I lived in New York, we'd go over two or three times a year for a while.
She'd go two or three times a year.
He'd go about once a year.
It was just down the street in the British Museum.
It showed up with a drawing, and they said, oh, this is great.
We'll use this.
And I think I was paid 35 pounds for it.
Is that the only dust jacket work you've done, then, or artwork for the books?
I've done a couple of minor things, but basically I just did that as a favor for Bill.
Yeah, sure.
And it was just a trippy thing to do.
Yeah.
You know, go up and turn across the room and see the office of the book.
A little story.
When I was asked to translate Kafka's The Trial, I did a re-translation of The Trial for Schocken, and the way it happened was I was contacted by Fred Jordan, who was then the editor at Schocken and looking to re-translate all of Kafka's work for copyright reasons.
So I was having lunch with him, and it had worked out.
We got along very well, because he'd also been the editor for Samuel Beckett at Grove Press before he came to Schocken.
And because my two great loves of literature have been Franz Kafka and Samuel Beckett, the notion that he had edited or was editing both, and we had that in common, made it easy for us to get along, and everything worked out well.
So I said to him, well, now you've been editor, really, both for Beckett and now for reissue of Kafka's work.
Is there any young writer?
that you would say might be a genius, like a Kafka or a Beckett?
And he said, yes, there's a young writer, and this was years ago, of course, William Bowman.
He said he's crazy.
He lives with prostitutes.
He's in drug areas, and he's going to die young.
I know that.
But he said, I think he's got genius.
And I said, well, what has he written?
He said, I'll send you the new book.
It would just come out.
It was Whores for Gloria, that's the name of it.
Horrors for Gloria.
Right.
And they were just bringing it out.
He said, I'll send you a copy.
He sent me a copy.
And that was the first thing I read by Bowman.
And I thought it was so different from anything else that I'd read.
It was so different and interesting and repellent in some ways that that got me started in collecting.
Do you agree that it is genius?
Absolutely.
It is genius.
There's no question.
But it's like...
It's like you can read a thousand pages, and there'll be a lot of it that you'll say, you know, almost you'll say, I wish he hadn't written this, almost.
There's too much there.
Then there are passages that are so wonderful that it makes it all worth it.
And there's an overall, an overarching impetus there behind the work that he has that I think is very strong and unique.
in a way.
One of the things, this long thing, I think, in the New York Review of Books that was written about him, basically said, no one else in American literature today is writing like he writes or doing what he does.
He's a person who's totally different than anybody else writing.
He used to, partly, to literature, what Jackson Pollock was to painting.
And even though the paintings, once you got through the initial shock of it,
They were transformative, and that's kind of what I think he's about, is that transformation of attitude.
And he goes where no man will dare go.
Well, here's an example.
When I was with him at breakfast, he said, what do you think I ought to be writing?
You know, you've read my, you know my work.
What should I be doing?
And I said, I love your short stories.
I said, I think you should do more short stories, because I think
When he holds himself into the short story mode, he really comes up and does some great things.
When he gets into the novels, they're big and long and so forth.
So the next thing that came out was not short stories, but this one that's called, I believe, The Royal Family.
But it got the worst reviews you can imagine for a novel because it repelled people.
So it dealt with the prostitutes and a number of prostitutes in San Francisco.
But I read it all the way through.
And I thought that it was a work of real moral courage to write this work.
I thought it was... And the thing he presents, believe it or not, he presents a pedophile.
A man interested in young girls.
Sympathy, though.
With sympathy.
With sympathy in this sense, not with sympathy for pedophilia.
But he creates a human character that you begin to understand.
Somewhat like the film, what is the film that presents also a pedophile, a man with a young boy, and he's made to feel human?
Is it called happiness?
Is that the word?
At any rate, he does this.
His characters in there are all characters for whom he has compassion.
And at the end, that's why I would say moral courage.
My feeling is at the end, he's saying,
We all say something like, you know, Christ would say, everyone come to me, or, you know, open up and compassion everyone, but nobody really is that way.
But in fact, we should be that way.
We should be open and compassionate and understanding to everyone.
And, boy, if you take that far enough, that means being open and compassionate and understanding to some pretty questionable characters, and that's the problem.
He showed up.
At my apartment one day, I had done something for him.
He said, I want to give you something for the help of, you know, art material for 10 years, whatever it was, didn't matter.
And he had a portfolio of these gigantic Jacques Sturgis photographs that were going to be used in Horace or Laurie or one of the projects.
And he said, I want you to pick one of these.
Well, we covered the table with these things, and they were just amazing photographs.
You could just see the plight of these women.
Every photograph had a story, and Bill was there when the photographs were taken, so he knew the name of this woman.
He forgot the name of this woman.
They were all very young, and they were looking at documents about white slavery or something.
And I finally said, I'll take one of these, but I can't hang this.
I don't know how to live with this.
It'll go into my file with other prints.
And I'm not even sure how to react.
I don't know whether I'm grateful or what.
I knew that Sturgis was a really fine photographer, and I better not not do this, because this is probably going to be the least worth some money.
But it was a very difficult afternoon to embrace that huge compassion that this crazy man has.
How did you meet him?
He called me on the phone and said that he'd run into somebody that knew me, and he had a book to show me.
And this was this giant steel book.
and I ran into a lot of interesting, strange people in New York, and Bill was right up there with the top of the line, and I just felt that this guy's got something, because he reminds me of a kid that he'd run into at a gas station and ask directions from, and he kind of had this slow... He really seems autistic, is what you tend to think.
He just seems kind of like a god present.
There's something there you think,
He's just not right.
There's something wrong there.
But it's not clear what it is that's not quite right.
In his young life, he had traveled more in the last few years than I've traveled in my life.
And then he would go to the Arctic.
He did a reading at Granary Books one night.
And he had just, two days before, come back from a different one.
And he basically told us that in this village, he brought this woman with him.
who was just psychotic, and he could barely keep her under control.
And he said, well, yeah, you have to kind of forgive whatever her name was.
All the kids had giant parkas, and they just sniff glue and solvents all day long to stay high.
But their existence is so terrible that if they sober up, they're just crazed.
So he brings this woman to New York.
Boy, she was just astonishing.
She was just a hand case.
Is his work energized by substances?
I don't think so.
But I don't know.
I found Bill so interesting, but I also knew that we'd hang out well.
We'd go to a Korean restaurant and share meals, and it was just kind of like a family outing.
And I never detected any drug use.
His wife was a physician, and I don't think she'd put up with it.
But she was concerned about his health and the trend of regulations.
Yeah, he does write about extreme situations.
I'm trying to think whether there's any description of where he actually is taking drugs himself.
But he certainly writes about characters who have sex regularly with prostitutes.
And no doubt that's him, too.
And specifically without protection from time to time.
And I don't know what that is.
I don't know what the line is there between fiction and reality.
Obviously, he's still alive.
So does the guy shoot craps with the fates?
I mean, is it every day?
People tend to think that he has this tendency toward self-destruction.
The thing you can read about is that when he was young, and I'm not sure whether he was actually here.
It didn't happen here in Bloomington.
When he was even younger than that,
He was supposed to be watching his younger sister, and she got in the swimming pool and drowned, and he felt responsible for that.
And for the rest of his life, he seems to have two things.
One, a desire to help young girls save prostitutes, save women who are lost, and the other for sort of a self-lacerating
guilt that he really doesn't deserve to be alive, and he'll just put himself in harm's way and see what happens.
This is one interpretation.
I don't think that.
Yeah, I think it's the relationship with his sister.
So you didn't know about the sister?
I didn't know.
He doesn't talk about it, but he writes about it, and his
When he brought this young woman to New York, that sounds very much like a savior idea.
Yeah, it's to save the girl.
But he's the only person who is recording, with any depth or honesty at all, with real depth, the life of the underclass, the downtrodden, the drug addicts, the prostitutes,
everywhere and all around the world and he also told me that he has a collection of thousands of photographs of prostitutes and and the down and out that he has shot or he's collected i think he's shot most of them and he asked me what what should be done with what i thought should be done and i said i think they should be preserved who else has done this uh on the other hand a place like the lily library is probably not the best place but
Kinsey is possible.
Also, of course, the Library of Congress is collecting these sorts of materials, too.
So he's got it.
He said a lot of them may be on, you know, silver prints or things that there may be problems with preservation and stories.
Well, he did a book on prostitutes, the earliest photographs of prostitutes I've seen from New Orleans.
Yeah.
So at any rate, he does, I think, has a big collection.
But he's socan you imagine everything he's doing?
Do you think a writer like this, his impact remains to be measured?
I mean, this is something long after he's gone.
I think we're going to have to wait another 20 years.
You think?
This is one of these sleeper writers, right?
Well, actually, maybe he hasn't even found his form yet.
And his form or his audience, perhaps.
Or his audience.
And the thing, you know, yeah.
Well, I mean, it's 25 to 35 years.
He's got an audience.
I think that his, you know, it'll be years before his place in American
But one thing as a collector that I've done, which I think is one valuable role that collectors can have, is in recognizing and thinking somebody is important that way, I realize that these limited editions, just not only are they not being collected, really, I mean, it's just too hard to get to them.
But they're not even being created.
I mean, an edition of ten copies.
He's done three copies.
I have one.
These other two went to process.
He hasn't done any more copies.
When would he do it?
When would he have copies?
He comes up with so many ideas, and he started to realize that the last time we talked about this was probably before I moved, so probably five years ago, six years ago, and he was coming to terms with the fact that making
a unique book or a small edition, which is just a mountain of work.
And it doesn't pay off financially for him in any significant way.
It probably will when that start of his is really up there.
What I have then is a complete collection of all of these limited editions, of every one of them together.
So that'll be here at the Lilly.
But I don't think there'll be a similar collection anywhere in the world, because
unless he gets back into making the books.
And it's a really hard thing to go back and make a fourth copy of a book that you did 20 years ago.
You don't have the same paper.
You don't have the same energy.
Well, do you think he'd be tempted to change it as he's going along, too?
I mean, do you think it's going to be a copy of the book that he did 20 years earlier?
That's totally true.
Yeah.
I don't think he would do it.
I would say it's going to be like leaves and grass, you know, across the field changing from when... You see, even at the time he did that extra copy or unique copy of Convict Bird for me, I think if somebody asked him to do that now, he probably wouldn't go back and do it now.
He's doing too many other things.
Or to change it.
He's passing it.
He'd be right.
I mean, that book represents another time.
I just don't think he would return to it now.
I think there's too much going on.
in his life.
I don't know.
No, I think that's true.
I was asked to do it.
I was going to say, what if someone came to you and said, we do?
Somebody wanted to buy the original flight into Egypt, and I don't want to sell it at this point.
So I said, well, I'll make you one, because those themes are still alive.
But it's not going to look anything like it.
I don't even know what it would look like, but let me go and work on this.
It turned out to be an entirely different book.
Yeah.
with just an evocation of some Egyptian esoteric... Still very, very interesting, though, to be able to compare the two.
And it was an interesting exercise, because I'd never done it.
But I could certainly see where, as I was working on it, I felt like that's a really good idea, but I've exhausted it.
I no longer have a taste for that kind of fried food anymore.
Well, what I liked about the convict bird thing was that the first one had been black and white and the second one color.
That's an interesting thing when an author thinks, OK, I've done it black and white.
I mean, what would it be like in color?
Oh, the technology is all different?
I have a whole chapter.
I've got to read this chapter in my book about when is completed work completed work?
Should Wordsworth have gone back to rewrite the poems of his youth, you know, disastrously?
Is there any answer?
Yeah, you shouldn't.
You should leave it alone.
I've always either asked, how do you know when the drawing is done, or how do you know when the book is done?
A published work should speak for that person you are.
That's my view.
Yeah.
I know somebody like Bill Kennedy, William Kennedy, when The Ink Truck was his first book, and then he hits it with ironweed.
Ironweed.
And so then people say, well, maybe, he said, that book had so many flaws, and the temptation is to go back and make it right.
But he said, that book was
The person I was when I wrote it, and you'll leave it.
But there are the people who, Henry James, when he was doing the New York edition, I mean, he was writing the prefaces while he started redoing the books.
I mean, isn't that right?
Henry James was famous for rewriting them.
That's why I keep thinking we all need, like, a foreman to make sure that we don't go back and do something.
Oh, that one's done.
You just leave it.
I have in mind Tim O'Brien, when he was, he told me, and I've got it in my book, that he was, they were bringing out a paperback edition of Going After Cacciato people.
I said, well, I've got to fix this stuff up.
There are things here that... And he got a call from a professor and said, you know, we're reading your book in class.
And he said, I've got the hardcover and the kids have the paperback.
And he said, we're reading two different books.
I said, you know, is that a good idea?
Another... It's a thing that as a literary translator, I face all the time.
When are you finished with the translation?
It's a little different.
And it's amazingly hard, once a book has been published, to get a publisher to let you correct some, even if they're simple errors.
I know in the Kafka there are about four or five things that I knew even before it came out.
I tried to correct on the proofs.
They didn't get through.
And I've written and written.
It's in the eighth printing now.
It's sold maybe 100,000 copies.
They say they'll put it in a file and they'll do it in the next printing, but they never do it because it's extra money.
They're selling it fine.
Why should they take the time to go back and reprint?
I have mistakes.
I drive them crazy.
Well, I haven't been able to drive them crazy enough yet.
Next time I'm in New York, I will ask to meet.
with the woman who's now the editor and just say, look, you know, you've gone through eight... It's not hard.
It's all computers now.
Nobody's caught these yet, but when somebody says to me, why didn't you do this on page so-and-so, I am going to be able to show them a letter before the first edition came out where I asked if that be corrected.
And you're the guy who's going to take the hit.
I preserve this all here at the Lilly and my Kafka papers.
protect myself for the future.
But it's really interesting how an error gets accepted.
It works its way into the body of work, and then for just a commercial reason or neglect, it stays.
And so something, whatever, I can give you a decent example, but I have cookbooks that eggs are left out of this dumpling recipe, and it will not work without that.
And yet, you know, it's a fanny farmer in the
definition, and it's still wrong.
What does nobody cook?
History repeats itself, but historians repeat one another.
Once the mistake is there, it's there, and it just keeps replicating itself.
It's almost impossible.
People will quote you, thank goodness it hasn't happened to me, but if you've got an error, and somebody keeps repeating the error.
Because they cite, well, it was in this guy's book, and
I don't know how many book-finding books I have that will all, it's almost as if they were written by the same, there was a vertex somewhere, and everybody just will all do my version, and they're all perpetuating the same horrible practice, with no thought to, let's test this, let's do something, it's just so, the literature trickles down, and then it's kind of looked up to our generation to sort it out at all.
no, this is not what you want to do here.
It's been a long, of course, it's in commercial bindings, I'm thinking that, but what a long tradition there have been of books that cannot be read without destroying the binding.
I mean, it's just impossible to read many books without destroying the binding.
And the great irony is there are so many bookbinding books that you can't open.
Yeah.
There's information tucked down in the gutter, and it's just, Philip's book is just a beautiful example.
It's printed grain wrong.
So here's this book that originally was probably $35, and my reading copy is just a mess, and I had to buy another copy just so I could keep this thing largely intact, and I'm going to have to fix this thing someday.
It's on that Paul Bonet binding that's on that beautiful Schmid book.
It opens about like this, and it's fantastic prints inside it.
You just can't see.
The binding's beautiful as a rock, but not as a book.
It doesn't function as a book at all.
I know all these great stories.
I mean, Pauly, a lot of Makarski complained to Monet that his books didn't open.
And he said, well, I'll speak to my binder about this.
And, of course, nothing changed.
And somebody else complained, and he said, well, this book, you know,
Well, you've obviously been reading this.
Why would you want to open it anyway?
Well, okay, so we buy this $40,000 binding, and then we buy the Pantheon edition to read.
Let me ask you a question about the covers of these books, because they're so beautiful, and I hesitated to touch it.
I want to make sure my hands were clean, and I see that you've put the notebook on top of that one.
How worried are you about the fragility of the covers in terms of something happening?
I'm worried.
We don't go up and rub paintings, but we touch books.
Yeah, exactly.
So these are, the paper is, I resize the paper, I coat it, the painting drawing is done.
When it's had days to cure, I install the painting on the board, counterwork the backside so it's flat, and then before I install the boards, they're given a coat of ketone varnish.
And then I wax that, and over the course of the next policy, this is probably by June, I'll have put maybe six, eight coats of paste wax on and work that in.
So it'll lose some of this on both of these.
You're still, because you haven't made the boxes yet, those are still in progress.
But they're absolutely, you could put a coffee cup on this.
I was going to say.
And they function as coasters.
See, is that nice?
They're user-friendly.
The more encrusted books are bulletproof.
The resins tend to get harder because of their main mixes of sand and soil and eggshell.
They become like body armor.
I like that in the book.
They have to work as reading machines.
They have to work so when Jim goes to exhibit something that it can lay open for whoever on the show is
And any book that won't do that, I think is, I have made books that don't open well, and the master binders that I show them to, one time I showed a book to Philip, and he said, oh, this is very French, and he wouldn't open it any further, and this is, well, it will open, it's a tight back, so, you know, you should use some caution.
And I went, well, I really like binding it that way, because of this,
long-held tradition that's so wonderful, and yet it makes sense.
So there's this ongoing conflict of, do we do it this way because it's just really wonderful for gold tooling, or are we going to do it that way because it opens?
And I don't think before World War II, openability was an issue.
I can find nothing in the literature that says it's important that it won't work.
It says it's important that they be well-bound.
I remember years and years ago an exhibition I was at in Paris of when book objects were just beginning to be seen, and of course, yeah, and that was the word they used, the book object, and of course, those are books.
which not only can't be opened, but are never meant to be opened, not to be read.
They're simply pieces of sculpture that are inspired or related to it.
There's a couple in Miami who I wrote very briefly.
I've been from home.
I wrote about them very briefly in one of my books.
These people are 65,000, and it's just the houses.
engulfed with all of these books as objects.
They call it concrete, a concrete and visual poetry collection.
Yeah, that's right.
We have a very large collection of concrete poetry here from Mary Ellen Solt, who was a major person in the field, and so we'd have to note that that was too.
I think that their collection is now either in a museum or is it placed somewhere.
Well, I started two years ago at home.
It's still there.
They're trying to place it.
That's it.
But it's such a huge collection.
It's so valuable that, you know, the only thing that they could really do is either sell it at auction or donate it to the place.
They're a lot of fun.
They really are a hoop, those two of them.
We went out to dinner, and they came to, I was at the Miami Book Fair, and they came, and they introduced themselves right after the time.
What are you doing tonight?
Oh, that's them.
I said, well, let's go.
And I just said, jeez, I wish my wife were here to see this.
This was really, really something.
I mean, they lie down on the floor, you know, to be part of this book arrangement.
I said, I remember one line, and they loved it, and I said, do you actually, does anybody read these books?
I mean, what do you do with these things besides view them?
They thought that was hysterical that someone had actually asked that question.
I thought they were talking concrete poetry like it was, you know, as opposed to abstract poetry.
I didn't realize that they were using that description in a literal sense.
Well, just the same way you were collecting dictionaries.
Martin was collecting concrete poetry and Russian constructivist material that nobody cared.
And he could pick these books up for just peanuts.
And all of a sudden, it caught on.
And so then he switched.
I think early artist books.
And I probably met him in 82 or 83 when they were just getting that collection going.
And until he stopped collecting, he was buying one or two books a year.
And the last one was a pretty big book.
And I called him up and said, it's finished.
I'm ready to deliver it.
And how should I send it?
And he said, well, I buy you an airplane ticket.
You bring it down.
I'll put you up in an art deco hotel.
and go ahead and I'll show you the collection.
And it was just a staggering three days.
And the kids are all gone, so all the bedrooms are just full of flat files.
And you open it up in one drawer, and it's full of John Furnable drawings.
And I only went through one drawer.
And all the time I was there, I didn't even go to the second floor and go out.
Oh, too much.
I went downstairs and went back to the Furnable drawer.
thought, oh, this is impossible.
I met the, I gave a paper.
We were together at a conference at the Getty, where on the history of the book, where I gave a paper, and they were there talking also about collectors, collectors, bookmakers, and supposed academics about the book, and talked with them about the collection.
And it turned out I actually had a book
that they didn't have that I was able to give them.
So I feel like I've contributed in a small way to their collection anyway.
Shaped poetry is another way to look at it.
Then you don't run into this problem with concrete versus abstract.
A lot of it is shaped poetry, although when they... But it gives you more an idea of what they're interested in, really, is the notion of text as somehow having a
a concrete shape to them, a form.
But it goes way beyond that.
Because you wouldn't call your work concrete.
No.
Martin was just so compelled by it.
Yeah, he just liked it.
And I don't even know how it fits in the collection.
Well, it's a book.
Yeah.
And maybe that's the starting point.
He invents medical devices to support his collecting.
Yeah, he developed amazing chicken soup machines and heart surgery.
The man who's the richest man in Indiana, and is here from Bloomington, has given a great deal of money to our library, Bill Cook, also invented a medical device, a stint that goes into the heart, and started in his garage here with a $2,000 loan years and years ago, and he's now in, you know, he's the richest man in Indiana, but also one of the top 400 richest men in the world, all from that new invention.
I could probably redesign the top.
to make it better and palatable.
I think you've got an idea.
I think I've got a really good idea.
We'll just keep it amongst the forums at the end.
Well, yeah, you've probably got time.
You'll have lunch eventually and so forth.
I'm going to go down.
There's supposed to be someone floating around that is a
a potential donor.
Well, I'm just going to see where he is floating at the moment.
I haven't met him.
I know he's in town and he wanted to come by.
So I'd better check my office and see.
And then, if you wanted to talk more, but this is business.
How can I get in touch with you?
I'm going to see if I have a card.
If I don't, I'll write everything down.
Okay, good.
All those things.
I'm going to run down now, and then if you want to talk later, we can talk more.
Thank you.
If we can't do it today, maybe we can... What is this one that we're looking at?
Well, there's another map that just shows some of the different dialects, both in a very colorful one.
But sometimes there'll be a printed language, and it'll be just with a specimen, like this is behind as it happens.
And how many languages do you, are you able to...?
Well, I'm limited.
I do French, German, and English for my languages, and I've studied, you know, enough that I can read other languages.
So these are largely books, for the most part, that you can't read?
Well, I have, as I mentioned, over 550 different languages.
And so you can expect that there's probably about 540 of them that I can't do my job.
But that's irrelevant to the purpose of what you're doing.
Actually, once you get into it, as you know, once you get into it, you learn, you begin to recognize things.
For instance, I know the word dictionary and vocabulary and other things.
in many, many, many different languages.
And I can often recognize, because of the vocabulary, the same sorts of things that are being said about various languages.
You got into a little bit of this upstairs, but how again is it that you got into this collection of lexicons and dictionaries?
Yes.
I had finished my collection of Franz Kafka and purchased the last
item that I didn't have, which was the first edition of his first book, and I got a copy that was a presentation copy from Kafka to Franz Werfel, and I was finished.
And when I finished, and actually I mentioned I sold that collection, and that's the one that the lame duck catalog was done of, and I was just bereft, wanting to collect, and really feeling at a loss, and then I said I would start
a new collection, and the idea I had was just to get one dictionary for each language in the world.
And that's when I talked to my wife and told her that's what I wanted to do, and she said, would they be little?
I said, oh yeah, pocket dictionaries.
But once, as soon as I got into it, I found out and thought it'd be obviously much more interesting to collect the first dictionary of each language in the world, which would almost always, and was in every case, be a bilingual dictionary.
early on with Latin, but often then with either English or French or Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch.
And so I had to be able to deal with those languages enough to recognize what was happening, but many other languages as well.
Was there a utility for you, being a translator?
Yes.
In fact, because I translate from the German, I'm a literary translator from the German, I had built up German-English dictionaries, a specialized collection of my own.
for translation purposes, for instance, a dictionary that would be specialized in dental terms, or a dictionary about sailing German English, or a confectionary's dictionary, and so forth.
And I bought dictionaries from different periods, so I have a dictionary, German English, 1780, 1800, 1830, 1840, 1889, 1900, 1910, the 30s,
during the Nazi period and then modern dictionaries.
And if I translated a text like Kafka that was written around 1910 to 1915, I would turn to a dictionary that was published at that time, including a dictionary of business terms or legal terms.
Well, how did you come to translation as a professional exercise?
Oh, that was just out of love, actually.
When I was an undergraduate at the University of Kansas, I started translating for fun, just learning language, and I thought it would be fun to translate short stories or poetry.
And a friend and I actually translated a full-length verse drama by Hugo von Hofmannsthal called Death and the Fool into blank verse, just
did it for fun because we were both just learning German, no German in our background.
So we started a literary magazine there that was a bilingual German-English literary magazine.
It was called Persuch, B-E-R-S-U-C-H, Attempt or Trial.
And we actually wrote around other universities in the area and had people contribute to it.
So we put out actually two issues a year of that.
How long did you do it?
I did it for the three years from the time I was a sophomore, for three years.
But it continued at least for 20 years.
I mean, the thing continued on and on, because they wrote to me, I think, on the 25th anniversary and said that they were doing that.
I also, in the meantime, ran into, later in life, one or two people who were professors in my area who had published in it from other institutions around, and so that was sort of fun.
So when I went to graduate school, I went to philosophy at Oxford, but I was also studying German, and I wound up doing comparative literature and writing on James Joyce's Ulysses and its impact on the German novel.
So the translation side was a little quiescent there.
But when I came back here, when I came here and started teaching, and I was... In 1968?
In 1968.
I think when I arrived, I just turned 26 at that time.
And you've been a lifelong bibliophile.
I've been collecting since I was about 14 years old.
And so when I've been at Oxford, I've been going to those auctions and going to the bookhouses and so forth.
Came back here and just reading widely found a text, some text that I really liked by a German author named Rudiger Kramer.
And I just thought I'd translate them for fun.
Got started actually by, after that, I met Jay Lachlan of New Directions.
He came out here to Indiana University.
I would have loved to.
Yeah, it's a wonderful, wonderful person.
He didn't do anything.
And he said, you know, we were at a cocktail party after his talk, and he said, what about German literature, anything you're interested in?
And he said, I'd like to publish some more German.
He said, we published a novel by...
by Martin Balzer, but he said it got pretty good reviews, but nobody bought it.
And, you know, I like German.
I want to do more German.
So I said, I'm translating an author.
He asked me to send it.
I sent it.
He published the thing that I sent in the New Directions annual.
He liked the author.
He actually then took out a contract for the man's first book whenever he finished writing his first novel, which I then translated.
New Directions asked me to read.
things for them that were in German to recommend them for publication, because Lachlan liked me, and he knew I could translate and cared about German literature.
And they asked me a couple of things, and I said, no, I don't think that'd go very well in America.
Then they sent me something that I liked, and I said, yes, I think that should be published.
And they asked me to translate it.
And that started me.
Now I've done, I think,
six books for New Directions and translation.
But, of course, you're very mad as Kafka, you were saying.
But Kafka is the most famous author translated, although I translated... Pardon me, beyond fame, or the one that seems to have the greatest resonance for you.
For me, if I could have, if you would have asked me, or told me, you can translate any book from German literature you want to, that's ever been written, I would have picked
the trial to translate it from.
And I was asked to do it.
That's a dream that not many people have come true.
Does it become a different work?
Absolutely.
The interesting thing to me about translation is that translation is not only a reading.
Every translation is a reading of the text.
But every translation is a different reading of the text, too.
If the same text is translated by three different people, it's three
different readings of that text.
So is the translator a filter, so to speak?
It's always a filter and a conveyor at the same time.
It's inevitable that the translation is a translator's reaction to a text in language.
And the other interesting side of it, to me, is that the translator, in some sense, is the ideal reader.
When Joyce wrote Finnegan's Wake, he said, you know, I spent 18 years, 17 years writing this novel, and I expect somebody to read, to spend an equivalent time reading it.
Somebody who writes a novel, yeah, somebody who writes a novel then, and they care about every sentence, and they've paid attention to every sentence.
The only reader who ever reads a novel and looks at every sentence
How it's constructed and what it means and why it's there is a translator.
Nobody ever reads as closely as a translator does.
When I translate a novel, I've read that novel not once but many times, but I've also looked at and thought about every sentence and how it's put together and why it's put together and how it could be transported into another language effectively.
Have you ever translated the same work
multiple on multiple occasions well that's the process one goes through in translation not for publication you know but I could have done it and I could still do it for Kafka for instance in the trial my translation of the trial is was was done because a new critical edition of the original text had come out and they shock and wanted a new translation partly for copyright reasons and that translation I did was a very
close and faithful translation in the sense that for every sentence in the German, there's one sentence in the English.
For every paragraph in the German, there's one paragraph in the English.
All punctuation, for the most part, from sentence to sentence almost stays the same.
Now, that is... And it's generally not the case in translation.
Generally, German sentences, because they're long, often are broken up into shorter sentences, the paragraphing is changed.
Very standard.
Were you happy with that?
I was happy with it because I was trying to reflect.
I was requested to do it closely and faithfully.
I was happy to do it because it reflects very closely the critical, new critical edition of the German text.
And the reader can be sure in English that they're getting something very close to the original.
Of course, I tried to also make it accurate, so there were no mistakes in it that understood what the German meant.
And to make it faithful in the sense that it is powerful as a text, because the trial is extremely powerful.
But I could do it again.
Could you do it differently?
Yes, I could do it very differently.
The way I would do it if I did it again or differently is I would think, what if instead of being faithful in that way, I tried to do the text in a freer way
with paragraphing and sentences closer to the normal English, what one might do in English.
In other words, instead of writing a translation of Kafka, to say, how might Kafka, had he written in English, how might he have written this text, or what might he have done with it?
Now, that's a little bit different, but, for example, if I were doing it again in this freer way, I would change the paragraphing.
Because the paragraphing in German does one thing, but paragraphing in English is a different sort of thing than paragraphing in German.
And I think that there would be certain ways that could be quite effective.
The other thing is that Kafka's trial is done from a manuscript.
It was never published during his lifetime.
Therefore, we don't know for sure that the paragraphing is the paragraphing he would have used.
Nor do we know for sure that he wouldn't have revised sentences or broken them up.
You can say the same thing about the Aeneas.
Yes, yes, yes.
So there could be a freer translation that could be very effective, I think.
Do you think that every great work, every generation, requires any translation?
Absolutely, absolutely.
The great mystery, I have actually written an introduction to my translation of the trial.
Maybe I'll send you the copy so you can see.
One of the great mysteries of art is that while the original retains somehow its freshness over time, over decades, and even over centuries, that we return to it and read it with great pleasure and great joy, translations age very quickly.
A translation, if you don't have a new translation every 20 years,
the translation is dated in a way that somehow the original text seems to be able to avoid.
So that if I read a translation that was done of Kafka as the Muir translation was done, say, in the 30s, it's in many ways a great translation, but it's clearly 1930s British English.
You know, it's not Kafka, 1915.
It's 1930s British English.
My translation is, let's say, 1990s
It's not American English, really, because I, of course, avoided Americanisms and so on.
But basically, it's the language of the 1990s, as effective as I could make it.
But it's a different translation.
And if it's translated in the year 2010 by someone else, or 2020, it'll have a different cast to it, without a doubt.
William Blake learning Google and Greek and Italian, so he can illustrate these great works.
Yeah.
But for a translation, not only is it a matter that every 10 or 15 years a new translation marks a different level in the history of our language and English as we develop, but in any given year, 10 different people could do a translation of Kafka and produce 10 different versions
each of which would have their own strengths and probably weaknesses, too, but be different readings and different fields.
There's also, you may know that a book that was put out which was called something like Six Against Kafka or something like that.
But anyway, what it was is the opening pages of Kafka's The Trial set in six different typefaces done by six different designers.
And you read those six, one after another, together in one book,
You absolutely feel differently inside.
You feel different inside as you read each individual opening page, based simply on changing the typeface.
Of course, you take a German, if it's in that old Fractur type, we call it, the sort of one that reminds us of the Third Reich, that's one feeling.
If you have in a modern sanser a type,
you have a modern feeling to it.
One can just feel almost old-fashioned or sort of antiquated, and the other one just feels modern without anything being changed.
Briefly, while we're waiting for Joel.
Yeah, Joel's just in front of you.
He's just in the men's room now.
He'll come out.
Give me a fast run-through on the Carlisle, just for the take on Hitler's, Hitler's, if you can.
Just for the details of it.
I went into the bookstore at
Mags, and went to the German section where nobody buys anything.
Joel, I'm just repeating this story.
Whenever you're ready, Joel.
Okay, it'll be a few.
I've got to get the card.
Okay, cool.
Then when I pull up in front, somebody will come in here.
Okay.
Brielle, would you like to go with us?
I'm going to meet at 1 o'clock as candidate for the music library and give her a tour.
Okay.
So thanks.
I'll miss it.
Okay.
Went to the German section, because I always went to the German sections because nobody ever buys books or bought books back in 65 about this was.
And there I saw Life of Friedrich the Great, a German edition in a blue leather binding.
It was just pretty, and I pulled it out and see what it was.
Open it, and it had book plate, Adolf Hitler's book plate.
Plus, tipped in as a tight note, obviously, from Mags, saying that
saying, I bought this book from a German soldier who just was one of the first to enter Hitler's lair at Baptist Garden immediately after the fall of the German troops earlier this year.
It's presumably the Fuhrer's own copy with his book played in it.
Next to a three-volume set in Vellum of Shakespeare, also with Hitler's book played in them, the
Carlisle was five pounds.
At the time, I was paying three pounds for my flat at Oxford per week, so that was something I could just barely afford.
I believe 25 pounds, 20 or 25 pounds for the three-volume Shakespeare.
I left that there, took up the Hitler, and said, I want to buy this, and I said, this was Hitler's
I mean, I was just wonderful to have it in my book.
Exactly.
And he said, oh, well, he said, you know, not many people probably looked in that German era.
It's not really very popular, but that's probably why it's still here.
Obviously, it's been there for 20 years, since 45 to 65.
Took it back.
I got Hugh Trevor Roper's book, who was teaching at Oxford, Last Days of Hitler, turned to the index.
looked up Thomas Carlyle, just see if it might be there, and it says, Carlyle, Thomas, Life of Frederick the Great, Hitler's Favorite Book, page so-and-so.
I turned to the page and it said, Hitler's favorite book was Carlyle's Life of Frederick the Great, because Hitler identified with Frederick as surrounded by enemies and so forth.
In fact, he loved the book so much that Goebbels reports in his diary that in the last days in the bunker, Goebbels read aloud from the Life of Frederick the Great to
Hitler, and the tears stood in the Fuhrer's eyes.
Do you ever wonder yourself what sections he was reading?
Yeah, no, absolutely.
It'd be very interesting.